Post: Working with Multiple Kubernetes Clusters using Okteto (#31)
okteto/blog-proposals: working-with-multiple-clusters.md

> As a developer, there's going to be a time where you need to work with different Kubernetes clusters. At a minimum, you need to work with two clusters. One is your local clusters, and a second one could be a remote cluster for testing purposes in a cloud provider or elsewhere. Kubernetes has a set of configurations you can use to interact with different clusters from your workstation using kubectl. At the end of the day, remember that you're interacting with an API to persist the desired state for your workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a developer, there's going to be a time where you need to work with different Kubernetes clusters. At a minimum, you need to work with two clusters: one is your local cluster, and a second one could be a remote cluster for testing purposes in a cloud provider or elsewhere. Kubernetes has a set of configurations you can use to interact with different clusters from your workstation using kubectl. At the end of the day, remember that you're interacting with an API to persist the desired state for your workloads.
```

I feel like we're missing a sentence or to briefly present contexts and explain how this solves the "two clusters" problem.

> Even though kubectl offers a set of commands you could use to work with different clusters, you might need another set of tools to make your life easier. And if you're using Okteto, you don't need to use another tool and almost forget about kubectl to work with different clusters. We'll see in this post how's that possible.

Reviewer: Could we add a little bit on why you might need other tools? Is it because it's hard, or hard to remember?

> Even though kubectl offers a set of commands you could use to work with different clusters, you might need another set of tools to make your life easier. And if you're using Okteto, you don't need to use another tool and almost forget about kubectl to work with different clusters. We'll see in this post how's that possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though kubectl offers a set of commands you could use to work with different clusters, you might need another set of tools to make your life easier. And if [you're using okteto](https://github.com/okteto/okteto), you don't need to use another tool and almost forget about kubectl to work with different clusters. We'll see in this post how's that possible.
```

But first, let's briefly talk about contexts in Kubernetes, which is the configuration you use to work with multiple clusters.

## What's a Kubernetes Context?

A context in Kubernetes a set of parameters you have to communicate with a cluster from your local workstation using kubectl.

> 

Reviewer: could we put a small example here?

If you're already using Kubernetes, you might give it a look in your `~/.kube/config` file, and you might find out that you already have the configuration necessary to connect to different clusters. In case you want to understand more about Kubernetes contexts, you can [visit the official Kubernetes documentation site](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/) and learn how to [configure access to multiple clusters using contexts](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/). In this post, I'll focus on the different ways you have to use contexts to increase your development productivity when working with more than one cluster.

## Using Kubernetes Contexts

Once you have your kubeconfig file configured with the contexts you'll need, it's time to use them.

The idea behind configuring a Kubernetes context is that once you have configured your access to the different clusters, you can run this command:

```
$ kubectl config use-context docker-desktop
Switched to context "docker-desktop."
$ kubectl config use-context remote-cluster
Switched to context "remote-cluster".
```

> However, the above commands are still a little bit longer. Although you could create aliases in your workstation, I'd highly recommend you to use [kubectx](https://github.com/ahmetb/kubectx), a tool for switching and managing contexts. Besides changing contexts, you can easily go back to the previous contexts, show the current context, rename or delete a context, and more. So the above commands now will be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the above commands are still long and hard to remember. Although you could create aliases in your workstation, I'd highly recommend you to use [kubectx](https://github.com/ahmetb/kubectx) instead. Kubectx is a command line tool for switching and managing Kubernetes contexts. Besides changing contexts, you can easily go back to the previous contexts, show the current context, rename or delete a context, and more. So the above commands now will be:
```

```
$ kubectx docker-desktop
Switched to context "docker-desktop".
$ kubectx remote-cluster
Switched to context "remote-cluster".
$ kubectx -
Switched to context "docker-desktop".
```

> Every subsequence command you run will be making calls to the corresponding Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every subsequent command you run will be making calls to the corresponding Kubernetes cluster.
```

## Working with Multiple Namespaces

> At this point, you're able to connect and work with multiple Kubernetes clusters from your workstation. But remember that a context is also referring to a namespace in Kubernetes. That namespace will be the default one when you don't specify a namespace in a kubectl command. For instance, your `docker-desktop` context has the `default` namespace configured. Then, every time you run `kubectl get pods`, it will return the list of pods from the `default` namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, you're able to connect and work with multiple Kubernetes clusters from your workstation. But remember that a context is also referring to a namespace in Kubernetes. That namespace will be `default`  when you don't specify a namespace in a kubectl command. For instance, your `docker-desktop` context has the `default` namespace configured. Then, every time you run `kubectl get pods`, it will return the list of pods from the `default` namespace.
```

However, there are going to be times where you also need to work with different namespaces. Perhaps you're in charge of two applications, and each application uses a namespace to deploy the Kubernetes objects it needs. Every time you run a kubectl command, you'd have to specify the name of the namespace you want to use, like this:

```
$ kubectl get pods -n service-a
$ kubectl get svc -n service-b
```

> You might don't see a problem with the above commands. However, when you're coding, you might need to change namespaces a little bit quicker and avoid any confusion if you forgot to include the namespace's proper name. If you don't want to specify a namespace in every kubectl command you run, you'd have to modify the `~/.kube/config` file. However, there's a project called [kubens](https://github.com/ahmetb/kubectx) (from the same project creator as kubectx) that you could use to switch between different namespaces quickly.  kubens will update the Kubernetes context for you automatically. The above commands now can be like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might don't see a problem with the above commands. However, when you're coding, you might need to change namespaces a little bit quicker and avoid any confusion if you forgot to include the namespace's proper name. If you don't want to specify a namespace in every kubectl command you run, you'd have to modify the `~/.kube/config` file. However, [there's a project called kubens](https://github.com/ahmetb/kubectx) (from the same project creator as kubectx) that you could use to switch between different namespaces quickly.  `kubens` will update the Kubernetes context for you automatically. The above commands now can be like this:
```

```
$ kubens
default
service-a
service-b
$ kuebns service-a
Context "docker-desktop" modified.
Active namespace is "service-a".
$ kubectl get pods
$ kubens service-b
Context "docker-desktop" modified.
Active namespace is "service-b".
$ kubectl get svc
```

> As you've noticed, kubectx and kubens help you work with different clusters and namespaces, which is a little less problematic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you've noticed, kubectx and kubens help you work with different clusters and namespaces, which is a little less problematic. But still need to type a lot of commands.
```

But what if there's even a better way for developers? Let's see.

## Developing with Contexts in Okteto

> Okteto has support for configuring the context and namespace your applications might need. Hence, you have consistency at coding time because all developers are going to use the same configurations. Also, you'll have fewer commands to run. Even if the existing commands from kubectcl or the kubectx utility, you still need to switch manually. Conversely, with Otketo, you can include this configuration in the YAML manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okteto has support for configuring the context and namespace your applications might need. Hence, you have consistency at coding time because all developers are going to use the same configurations. Also, you'll have fewer commands to run, so you can focus on writing your application, not  on managing clusters. Even if the existing commands from kubectcl or the kubectx utility, you still need to switch manually. Conversely, with Otketo, you can include this configuration in the YAML manifest and forget about it.
```

Let's give it a try, run the following command to force the usage of the remote cluster:

```
$ kubectx remote-cluster
Switched to context "remote-cluster".
```

Now that the `okteto.yml` has the context configuration, run the `okteto up` command and compile the application, like this:

```
$ okteto up
 ✓  Development container activated
 ✓  Connected to your development container
 ✓  Files synchronized
    Context:   docker-desktop
    Namespace: default
    Name:      hello-world
    Forward:   2345 -> 2345
               3000 -> 3000

Welcome to your development container. Happy coding!
default:hello-world okteto> cargo run
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.78s
     Running `target/debug/hello-world`
Listening on http://0.0.0.0:3000
```

Notice how the Okteto output tells you which context is using.

You should now be able to see the application running in the local cluster, like this:

```
$ curl localhost:3000
Hello Kubernetes!
```

> When you close the Okteto terminal, notice that you're still using the remote cluster context. Locally, nothing changed because Okteto allowed knows which context to use to deploy your application where it should be running. At least, you're going to make sure you're developing in a local cluster and not in a production cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you close the Okteto terminal, notice that you're still using the remote cluster context. Locally, nothing changed because Okteto automatically knows which context to use to deploy your application where it should be running. With this, you can rest assured that you're developing in a local cluster and not in a production cluster!
```

```

You might don't see a problem with the above commands. However, when you're coding, you might need to change namespaces a little bit quicker and avoid any confusion if you forgot to include the namespace's proper name. If you don't want to specify a namespace in every kubectl command you run, you'd have to modify the `~/.kube/config` file. However, [there's a project called kubens](https://github.com/ahmetb/kubectx) (from the same project creator as kubectx) that you could use to switch between different namespaces quickly.  `kubens` will update the Kubernetes context for you automatically. The above commands now can be like this:

```
$ kubens
default
service-a
service-b
$ kuebns service-a
Context "docker-desktop" modified.
Active namespace is "service-a".
$ kubectl get pods
$ kubens service-b
Context "docker-desktop" modified.
Active namespace is "service-b".
$ kubectl get svc
```

As you've noticed, kubectx and kubens help you work with different clusters and namespaces, which is a little less problematic. But still need to type a lot of commands.

But what if there's even a better way for developers? Let's see.

## Developing with Contexts in Okteto

> Okteto has support for configuring the context and namespace your applications might need. Hence, you have consistency at coding time because all developers are going to use the same configurations. Also, you'll have fewer commands to run, so you can focus on writing your application, not  on managing clusters. Even if the existing commands from kubectcl or the kubectx utility, you still need to switch manually. Conversely, with Otketo, you can include this configuration in the YAML manifest and forget about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okteto has support for configuring the context and namespace your applications might need. Hence, you have consistency at coding time because all developers are going to use the same configurations. Also, you'll have fewer commands to run, so you can focus on writing your application, not on managing clusters. Even if the existing commands from kubectcl or the kubectx utility, you still need to switch manually. Conversely, with Okteto, you can include this configuration in the YAML manifest and forget about it.
```
